.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 1.1
.TH BITCAT 1
.B "** TO BE DELETED ** TO BE DELETED ** TO BE DELETED ** TO BE DELETED **"
.SH NAME
bitcat, ndparse, transfer
\- bitnet incoming file processing programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
bitcat
.RB [ " \-asa | \-b | \-d | \-rawpun " ]
.I filepath
.LP
ndparse
.RB [ " \-n " ]
.RB [ " \-a | \-b " ]
.RB [ " \-rawpun" "|" "\-bitraw " ]
.RB [ " \-d " ]
.RB [ " \-o "
.I outpath
.B ]
.I filepath
.LP
/usr/lib/huji/transfer
.I /absolute/file/path
\f4DestUser@DestNode
.B "**Under developement!**"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "sendfile"
.IX "netdata"
.IX "receive"
.LP
.I Bitcat
is a simple minded tool for receiving files.  Default usage is to translate
.SM EBCDIC
PUNCH or PRINT records to
.SM ASCII
and output them with appended newlines.
Trailing spaces are removed at first, as they are (usually anyway)
unnecessary.
.LP
.I Bitcat
can enter
.I \-d (debug)
mode, and display raw contents of spool file.
(Occasionally interesting.)
.LP
.I Bitcat
can also enter
.I \-b (binary)
mode where it outputs every record of file in following (raw) format:
.br
.ti 0.5i
\f4 <char of reclen>  <chars of record>
.LP
Alternatively
.I bitcat
can enter
.I \-rawpun
state, where it outputs punch file in 80 characters per record
format, no intermediate newlines or other fuss.
.LP
Non-binary mode uses internally compiled
.SM EBCDIC-ASCII
translation table, and outputs are in
.SM ASCII.
.LP
When feed a print file,
.I bitcat
can convert it to raw
.SM ASCII
with as accurate representation of carriage control, as possible.
It is also possible to get
.SM FORTRAN-style
carriage control mapped from MCC (see
.BR bitspool (5)),
and that be outputed. (Option
.IR -asa )
.LP
.I Bitcat
outputs file to \fISTDOUT\fR, and if wanted, debug output
to \fISTDERR\fR.
.LP
.I Ndparse
outputs to a file whose location is current working directory,
and name is formed from spool entry by lowercaseing
.IR FileName.FileExt ,
unless
.RB ` \-o ',
is used to override it.
With
.RB ` \-o '
one can specify
.RB ` \- '
to denote
.BR STDOUT .
Debug output goes to \fISTDERR\fR as usual.
.LP
With \fIndparse\fR
.SM ASCII
(`\fB\-a\fR', default when file does not have class N)
output is plain translated records of original data with added
separating newlines.
(Not even chopping of the trailing spaces -- XX: could it be usefull still ?)
Binary (with `\fB\-b\fR', a default, if file has class N) mode is plain
raw data from records.
Nothing extra like
\fIbitcat\fR's `\fB\-b\fR' produces..
.LP
.I Ndparse
is able to take input in varying formats:
.br
.ti 0.8i
\fB\-\fR Standard spool files
.br
.ti 0.8i
\fB\-\fR
.I Bitcat -b
.B "\-bitraw"
.br
.ti 0.8i
\fB\-\fR Raw 80 chars/rec punches
.B "\-rawpun"
.LP
.I Transfer program is under developement!
.LP
.I Transfer
modifies file headers changing its destination address so it is possible to
send that file again to NJE network for new destination.
However other security related aspects may not allow all tricks.
(For now origination address in headers will not be changed to point local
user, and thus it is possible to create a file which seems to be traversing
the network in wrong direction.)
.I Transfer
does also requeueing for file transmission.  For this ABSOLUTE 
path (one starting with `/') is necessary.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fInone\fR 1.0i 0
Punch files are output as is, and Print files get
converted from whatever carriage-control format
they use to ASCII-CR/LF/FF format.
.IP "\fB\-asa\fR" 1.0i 0
Print files are output with
.SM FORTRAN-style
carriage controls.  One line per input record.
.IP "\fB\-b\fR" 1.0i 0
Binary output.  See DESCRIPTION on each command.
.IP "\fB\-bitraw\fR" 1.0i 0
Special input format switch for
.IR ndparse .
Globs output from
.I bitcat -b
.IP "\fB\-d\fR" 1.0i 0
Debug output.  To \fISTDERR\fR.
.IP "\fB\-n\fR" 1.0i 0
Original `spool' file should \fBnot\fR be removed after successfull
file processing is done.  (Successfull == No errors, Netdata file
translated to ASCII using
.I bitcat
might not be usefull.)
.IP "\fB\-rawpun\fR" 1.0i 0
Special input format switch for
.IR ndparse .
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
With environment variable
.B EBCDICTBL
user can select alternate EBCDIC <-> ASCII translation
tables.  For more info, see
.BR ebcdictbl (5).
.LP
.SH FILES
.nf
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.I /etc/funetnje.pid
.RI "File processing exit config file, which is defined in " funetnje.cf.
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (1),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR sysin (8),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR rdrlist (8)
.SH BUGS
.LP
.I Ndparse
should be able to dig original dates and names from ND file.
.LP
Sometimes
.I ndparse
fails to understand received netdata file.  Subject for further
study.
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
When any of these programs is fed a file containing errorneous
data (not
.BR funetnje "(8) spool file,)"
these mostly recover with a burp, sometimes these
might even drop a core on pathological input case.
.SH WARNING
With
.I ndparse
it is one time mistake to forget to use
.B \-n
when peeking a file.  That file goes to bit bucket at that
moment if no errors are detected. (rc=0 -> no file...)
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network - FUNET
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
