.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993
.\"
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 3.0
.TH BMAIL 8
.SH NAME
`NJELIB'/bmail \- bitnet mail send tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IP bmail 0.6i 0
.RB [ " \-nd Gateway-address " ]
.RB [ " \-b(smtp) Gateway-address " ]
.RB [ " \-tag RSCS-TAG " ]
.RB [ " \-u origuser " ]
.if n .br
.I FromUser@FromNode
.I ToUser@ToNode
.RI [ " ToUser@ToNode... " ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "bmail"
.LP
.I bmail
command is actually a special purpose \fIsendfile\fR
(Historically: code of \fIsendfile\fR reused a lot of \fIbmail\fR code)
for mail transport, and thus is not a general user program.
Its input is a ready-made mail file, and it generates a BSMTP envelope,
when so requested.
.LP
Options for
.I bmail
are:
.IP "\fB\-b(smtp) gateway@host\fR" 1.8i 0
informing that the feed in mail shall be wrapped into a BSMTP/PUNCH envelope
with "MAIL FROM:<>" getting the first argument, and "RCPT TO:<>" getting
the rest (1 to many..)
This option has two alternate names: "\fB-b\fR", and "\fB-bsmtp\fR".
.I Line length is limited to 80 chars on this mode!  Wrapping of longer lines
.I is attempted, but it might not always be successfull.
.IP "\fB\-nd gateway@host\fR" 1.8i 0
informing that the feed in mail shall be wrapped into a BSMTP/NETDATA envelope
with "MAIL FROM:<>" getting the first argument, and "RCPT TO:<>" getting
the rest (1 to many..)
.I This accept indefinite length lines, minimum being 80 chars, true value
.I is calculated while preparing the BSMTP envelope into a temporary file.
.IP "\fB\-tag RSCS-TAG\fR" 1.8i 0
defines the 136 bytes (padded/truncated to that length) RSCS TAG data.
Usually not needed with
.IR bmail .
.IP "\fB\-u origuser\fR" 1.8i 0
Can be used to define local mail-sender pseudo-id.
For
.SM BSMTP
modes the default value is
.BR MAILER .
For others it is local user.
.LP
When
.IR bmail's
`From' argument contains a `.' in it, the file sender is changed to
be "MAILER@localname", however possible BSMTP will contain entered
`From' information.
.SH INTERFACING TO SYSTEM MAILER
In case of
.BR zmailer (8z)
by Rayan Zachariassen, interface goes as follows:
.LP
.nf
.ft CW
   $MAILSHARE/db/routes.bitnet contains:
	academic         bsmtp3!mailer!academic
	acmvm            bsmtp3!mailer!acmvm
	acusd            defrt1!acusd
	finhutc          bsmtp3nd!mailer!finhutc

   $MAILSHARE/sm.conf  contains:
	#
	# bitnet stuff F=hu not set
	#
	bsmtp3   snmSX /usr/local/lib/huji/bmail  bmail -b $h -u MAILER $g $u
	bsmtp3nd snmSX /usr/local/lib/huji/bmail  bmail -nd $h -u MAILER $g $u
	defrt1   snS   /usr/local/lib/huji/bmail  bmail $g $u
	bitnet2  snS   /usr/local/lib/huji/bmail  bmail $g $u

   $MAILSHARE/scheduler.cf  contains:
	defrt1/*
                command="sm -c $channel defrt1"
	bsmtp3/*
                command="sm -c $channel bsmtp3"
	bsmtp3nd/*
                command="sm -c $channel bsmtp3nd"
.ft R
.fi
.LP
Getting this installed into a BSD
.BR sendmail (8)
should not be very difficult, but definitely different..
Propably `mailer' definitions resemble  `sm.conf'  above.
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
With environment variable
.B EBCDICTBL
user can select alternate EBCDIC <\-> ASCII translation
tables.  For more info, see
.BR ebcdictbl (5).
.LP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.br
.I /etc/name.bitnet
(For system mailer)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR mailify (1),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR receive (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR transfer (1)
.SH BUGS
.LP
None that we know.
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
These programs show their usage summary, when there is something
wrong with input parameters.  Subtle usage bugs might not be detected!
.SH WARNINGS
When BSMTP envelope address overflows to longer than 80-characters,
and NETDATA is not used, there is no check at it, nor folding...
(There is a deliberate TRUNCATE at 80 cols, though..)
With the NETDATA the input can be of arbitary long lines (up to 64000
characters each).
.LP
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
