.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993, 28-Jan-1994
.\"
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 3.0
.TH "FUNET-NJE on UNIX" 8
.SH NAME
funetnje \- Bitnet NJE server on UNIX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IR funetnje
.RI [ loglevel ]
.RI [ debugflag ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "bitnet"
.LP
.I funetnje
is name for main program which does BITNET-II/VMNET-compatible communication
using IBM developed NJE protocol.
.LP
.I loglevel
is defaulted from configuration file (see below), but can be given
at startup too: 2..5 are supported, and usually not needed.
.LP
.I `debugflag'
is used when
.I funetnje
is wanted to stay connected with controlling terminal for some debugging
purposes.
Default for program is to detach itself from controlling terminal and then
to continue without connection anywhere.  (Usually /dev/console  gets
connection, but that is for output only.)
.LP
Value of
.I `debugflag'
is any non-void text or character.
When argc of program exceeds 2, that fullfills \fI`debugflag'\fR.
.LP
Location of 
.B configuration file
is usually
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
(It is defined in \fIconsts.h\fR source file.)
.LP
Sample \fBconfiguration file\fR:
.LP
.in +0.5i
.fp 4 CW
.fz 4 -2
.nf
\f4*
\f4*       Configuration file for FUNET-NJE program
\f4*
\f4
\f4* BITNET name of node:
\f4NAME            FINFILES
\f4* My Internet view of things
\f4*IPADDRESS      nic.funet.fi
\f4IPADDRESS       128.214.6.100
\f4* Directory for in & outbound traffics
\f4* Protection 2775 (or 2770), group "huji"
\f4QUEUE           /usr/spool/bitnet
\f4*  What kind of communication channel we have ?
\f4*  Choices: two named files, and UDP socket
\f4*CMDMAILBOX  FIFO /usr/spool/bitnet/.cmdfifo
\f4*CMDMAILBOX  SOCK /usr/spool/bitnet/.cmdsocket
\f4CMDMAILBOX   UDP  127.0.0.1 175
\f4* Logging file
\f4LOG             /usr/adm/bitnet.log
\f4* Optional RSCSv1 style accounting log.  Needed only on
\f4* international EARN nodes, though..
\f4*RSCSACCT       /var/log/bitacct
\f4* this table is a binary file, and generated with
\f4* \fBnjeroutes\fR(8)\f4 program
\f4TABLE           /usr/local/lib/huji/nje.routes
\f4* EBCDIC<->ASCII tables, (optional), see \fBebcdictbl\fR(5)
\f4*EBCDICTBL      /usr/local/lib/huji/ebcdictbl
\f4* Send information of wierd happenings to:
\f4INFORM          MEA@FINFILES
\f4* File containing user exits for files
\f4FILEEXITS       /usr/local/lib/huji/file-exit.cf
\f4* File containing user exits for messages (unimplemented)
\f4MSGEXITS        /usr/local/lib/huji/msg-exit.cf
\f4* Logging Level (smaller value, less logs)
\f4LLEVEL  2
\f4* System-wide default value for FORM.
\f4DEFFORM         STANDARD
\f4* Default route when routing table isn't complete for
\f4* some reason.
\f4*DEFAULT-ROUTE   FIGBOX
\f4
\f4* LINE, line number, remote node name
\f4LINE 0 FIGBOX
\f4 * TYPE UNIX_TCP (only available)
\f4 TYPE           UNIX_TCP
\f4 * BUFSIZE of single NJE transaction
\f4 BUFSIZE        1024
\f4 * TIMEOUT of something odd, 3 works well.
\f4 TIMEOUT        3
\f4 * IPPORT is usually fixed 175, unless opposite can't
\f4 *         manage it (which is true with VMS UCX + JNET
\f4 *         systems)
\f4 IPPORT         500
\f4 * TCPNAME gives opposite end IP address (numeric form
\f4 *         is fastest to resolve)
\f4 * TCPNAME       figbox.funet.fi
\f4 TCPNAME        128.214.6.7
\f4 * TCP-SIZE tells how much can be lumped into single TCP
\f4 *          block to be sent out.
\f4 TCP-SIZE       8192
\f4 * MAX-STREAMS gives the number of outgoing streams that can
\f4 *             be used against opposite.  Real IBM takes 7.
\f4 MAX-STREAMS    1
\f4
\f4 * Define another link to an IBM system
\f4LINE 1  SEARN
\f4 TYPE           UNIX_TCP
\f4 BUFSIZE        1024
\f4 TIMEOUT        3
\f4 IPPORT         175
\f4 *TCPNAME       searn.sunet.se
\f4 TCPNAME        192.36.125.4
\f4 TCP-SIZE       8192
\f4 MAX-STREAMS     7
\f4
\f4 * Define a link to another HUJINJE/FUNETNJE system
\f4LINE 1  ALIJKU65
\f4 TYPE           UNIX_TCP
\f4 BUFSIZE        1024
\f4 TIMEOUT        3
\f4 IPPORT         175
\f4 *TCPNAME       alijku65.edvz.uni-linz.ac.at
\f4 TCPNAME        140.78.3.34
\f4 TCP-SIZE       8192
\f4 MAX-STREAMS     7
\f4* End of definitions
.fi
.LP
Sample
.I file processing exit file:
.LP
.nf
.in +0.5i
\f4# FILE-EXIT.CF -- File disposition/processing exit file
\f4 
\f4# Rule for spool disposition path, defines also system default
\f4# user spool directory for those who don't have specially set
\f4# something else.
\f4# Possibilities:  ~/bitspool  -- real user's only! (~/ == users home)
\f4#                 /usr/path/path/ -- append 'touser' as subdir,
\f4#                                     it is spool dir.
\f4#                                    Valid for Exits and real users.
\f4#                 /usr/path/path  -- explicite directory.
\f4#                 /dev/null       -- explicite file (special case).
\f4#       When directory isn't present, it is built from upmost present
\f4#       level down to users bottommost level hmm...
\f4# Question about ownership of directory/files...
\f4#   Real users:  real protections, programs start with setuid() user.
\f4#   Exit users:  POSTMAST  (exits start as root anyway.)
\f4#   Exited reals: real protections, programs start with setuid() user.
\f4 
\f4Spool-Dir:      /usr/spool/bitspool/
\f4Postmast-Dir:   /usr/spool/bitspool/POSTMAST
\f4 
\f4# Now list of things to match and then what to do
\f4# To do keywords:       DISCARD  to /dev/null.
\f4#                       KEEP     just so.  Into default
\f4#                                directory, or given spool.
\f4#                       NOTIFY   KEEP, and send a NJE message
\f4#                                to somebody.
\f4#                       RUN      starts arbitary program with
\f4#                                arbitary arguments telling
\f4#                                about file location and its
\f4#                                properties.
\f4#                                If fails, well..
\f4#
\f4# Defining  SpoolDir  must be done with explicite trailing "/":
\f4#         /usr/spool/bitnet/SYSIN-JOB/
\f4  
\f4# Exit table begin keyword:
\f4Exit-Table:
\f4 
\f4# Args:
\f4# (Note: folding is for document only, real input must be wide.
\f4#        Continuation lines are prefixed with `+'.)
\f4# touser8 tonode8 fname8   ftype8  pun? class fruser8  frnode8 \e
\f4+             dist8     SpoolDir                     action    \e
\f4+    ExtraArgument
\f4# (Entry on  PUN?  can be one of:  *, PUN, PRT, SYSIN)
\f4# (Entry on  EXTRAARGUMENT can be program path arguments for the
\f4#  RUN  commands.  For TRANSFER it is the target address.    See
\f4#  funetnje(8) man page for documentation about macro expansion.)
\f4#
\f4*        *        *        *        SYSIN *   *        *       \e
\f4+             *         /usr/spool/bitnet/SYSIN-JOB/ RUN       \e
\f4+    /usr/local/lib/huji/sysin $SPOOL
\f4MEA      FINFILES *        *        *   *     HKS      SEARN   \e
\f4+             *         default                      DISCARD
\f4MEA      FINFILES *        *        *   *     *        SEARN   \e
\f4+             *         default                      RUN       \e
\f4+    /usr/local/lib/huji/transfer MEA@FIRIEN $SPOOL
\f4MAILER   FINFILES *        *        PUN M     *        *       \e
\f4+             *         default                      RUN       \e
\f4+    /usr/local/lib/huji/mailify $SPOOL
\f4NOBODY   FINFILES *        *        *   *     *        *       \e
\f4+             *         default                      DISCARD
\f4#FOOBAT  FINFILES *        *        *   *     *        *       \e
\f4+             *         default                      RUN       \e
\f4+    /usr/local/lib/huji/transfer touser@whatnode $SPOOL
\f4#
\f4# NETINIT is pseudo id for automatically re-generating routing tables
\f4# This is done with cron-driven  netinit.sh  which must be configured
\f4# by hand.
\f4#
\f4NETINIT  FINFILES *        *        *   *     *        *       \e
\f4+             *         default                      KEEP
\f4*        *        *        *        *   *     *        *       \e
\f4+             *         default                      KEEP
.fi
.LP
Sample
.I message processing exit file:
.LP
.nf
.in +0.5i
\f4#
\f4# Some first ideas about patterns, et.al.:
\f4#
\f4# Actions:  CMD: BUILTIN, RUN
\f4#           MSG: BRCAST, DISCARD, RUN, PIPE
\f4#
\f4 
\f4CmdHelpFile: /usr/local/lib/huji/cmd-help.txt
\f4 
\f4#$TOUSER $TONODE  $FRUSER  $FRNODE  C pattern  ACTION args
\f4.        FINFILES *        *        C "H*ELP"  BUILTIN HELP
\f4.        FINFILES *        *        C "FINGER *" RUN     \e
\f4+ /usr/local/lib/huji/nje-finger $FRUSER $FRNODE $TEXT
\f4#
\f4#$TOUSER $TONODE  $FRUSER  $FRNODE  M ACTION args
\f4#                 "." == FRUSER is blank
\f4MAILER   *        *        *        M  DISCARD
\f4MAILSERV FINFILES .        *        M  DISCARD
\f4MAILSERV FINFILES *        *        M  RUN               \e
\f4+ /usr/local/lib/mailserver/nje-msg $FRUSER $FRNODE $TEXT
\f4ECHO     FINFILES .        *        M  DISCARD
\f4ECHO     FINFILES *        *        M  RUN               \e
\f4+ /usr/local/bin/send -u echo $FRUSER@$FRNODE *Got Message: $TEXT
\f4#
\f4# The default
\f4*        *        *        *        M  BRCAST
.fi
.LP
.SH MACROES ON FILE-EXIT CONFIGURATION
.LP
On overall, following macro identifiers can be placed on the argument string.
.IP "\fB$SPOOL\fR" 1.5i 0
When no argument string is defined, this defaults as the only argument.
If this is not defined in the argument string, it defaults to be
the \fBlast\fR one.
.IP "\fB$$\fR" 1.5i 0
Expands to decimal process-id string, like in:  "/tmp/temp$$file"
.IP "\fB$FID\fR" 1.5i 0
The original spoolid on form of a string of 4 digits: 0001 \- 9900
.IP "\fB$TOUSER\fR" 1.5i 0
Destination user name.
.IP "\fB$TONODE\fR" 1.5i 0
Destination node name.
.IP "\fB$FNAME\fR" 1.5i 0
RSCS file name.
.IP "\fB$FTYPE\fR" 1.5i 0
RSCS file extension.
.IP "\fB$CLASS\fR" 1.5i 0
Spool file class
.IP "\fB$FRUSER\fR" 1.5i 0
Originating user name.
.IP "\fB$FRNODE\fR" 1.5i 0
Originating node name.
.IP "\fB$SPTYPE\fR" 1.5i 0
Spool file type, one of:
.BR PUNCH ", " PRINT ", " SYSIN .
.IP "\fB$TAG\fR" 1.5i 0
The RSCS tag.  Often 0-size string..
.IP "\fB$DIST\fR" 1.5i 0
Possibly defined RSCS DIST data.
.IP "\fB$DEST\fR" 1.5i 0
Possibly defined RSCS DEST data.
.B "(Not implemented yet!)"
.LP
Argument string chopping is done before macro expansion.
Thus if a macro expression expands to a string with blanks in it,
the resulting argument segment will then contain those blanks.
.LP
.SH FILES
There are two hardwired files which control the behaviour
of the rest of the system:
.IP "\fB/etc/funetnje.pid\fR" 1.0i 0
The "pid file" giving easy pointer to the running program.
.IP "\fB/etc/funetnje.cf\fR" 1.0i 0
The configuration file described above.
.LP
Rest of these are configured in the above-mentioned file, or
in its exit extensions.
.IP "\fB/usr/spool/bitnet\fR" 1.0i 0
Configured
.SM `QUEUE'
directory of transport routing.
Protection 2770 (or only mildly more open)
Group must be the same as set-gid programs
of FUNET-NJE have for accessing the intermodule
communication channel.
.br
This directory gets also file
.RB ` .socket.key ',
which contains the security code for all communications
via `CMDMAILBOX' channel.
.br
Another file that goes into there is a database file containing
system spoolids.
 A number in range 1 to 9900, inclusive.
File
.RB ` .spoolid.htdb '
contains a
.I HeapTree
database which is essentially an array implementation of (partially)
ordered tree, using userids as keys, and spoolids as data.
Content of data on that database is machine specific,  but on the other
hand, nobody is supposed to need to share them...
.IP "\fB/usr/spool/bitnet/.cmdpipe\fR" 1.0i 0
Configured
.SM `CMDMAILBOX'
of FUNET-NJE intermodule communication channel.
If it is a FIFO ("F"), it is protected as 660,
and in principle those who need to communicate
via it must to so either by being superusers,
using setgid programs, or having the groupid that
the
.SM `QUEUE'
has.
Alternate modes for this are SOCKET ("S"), and
UDP ("U"), FIFO and SOCKET define path to named
file, and UDP defines server host address (0.0.0.0, or
perhaps preferrably 127.0.0.1) and port (174).
.IP "\fB/usr/spool/bitnet/.spoolid\fR" 1.0i 0
A special file saving last used outbound spoolid in
binary format.  Transporter internal usage.

Recipient spool directories have also these
.B .spoolid
files, and their function is similar; keep status log.
.IP "\fB/usr/spool/bitspool/\fR" 1.0i 0
Configured (via exit files)
.SM `Spool-Dir:'
under which local recipients will get their own subdirectories..
Directory protection to be 111 or somewhat more open
(like 555.)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR sysin (8),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR rdrlist (8),
.BR njeroutes (8),
.BR receive (1),
.BR ucp (8),
.BR ygone (1),
.BR transfer (1)
.SH BUGS
.LP
Some of then, see  BUGS.FUNET  for a list of open issues.
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Plenty, obtainable into configurable file,
example gives \f4LOG\fR file value \f4/usr/adm/bitnet.log\fR.
Amount of log is controllable with \f4LLEVEL\fR in the configuration
file, startup time \fIloglevel\fR option, and
.BR ucp (8)
`\f4"LOGLEVEL nn"\fR' control commands.
.SH WARNING
Updating routing tables (see
.BR njeroutes (8))
without proper care (shutdown of server), may cause routing data
corruption, and/or crash of the router.
Very least the new routes will not get proper attention.
.SH NOTES
The following signals have the specified effect when sent to the
server process using the
.BR kill (1)
command.
.TP
.SB SIGHUP
Causes server to reread configuration file
.RI "(usually " /etc/funetnje.cf )
and exits specified in it.
This does
.B not
reinitiate link-setups/tear old ones down.
Use only for re-reading in the exits.
.LP
This will also close, and reopen routes database.
.TP
.SB SIGTERM
Causes server to dump statistics counters to log file, and to do shutdown.
(Compare with
.I ucp shut\fR.)
.TP
.SB SIGUSR1
Dumps statistics counters to log file.
.LP
FUNET's UNIX-version is somewhat different from the HUJI's VMS version,
when it comes to handling of files destined to local channel, as well
as when sending something out.
.LP
HUJI's version opens
.SM NETDATA
encodings (if present), and usually translates file contents to
.SM ASCII
(class N netdata is not translated, assuming it to be binary).
Also handling of file conversion to mail is done inside
the transport system.
.LP
FUNET's style is to let user and user programs to handle all such
details, and just to provide the raw datafile to them.
Also there the user (or his programs) must create the spool-files
containing
.SM RSCS PUNCH/PRINT
line images.
See
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR sendfile (1).
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Gerald Hanusch, Johannes Kepler Universitaet/Universitaet Linz, Austria
<k000165@alijku11.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, file handling exits,
man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
Batch (SYSIN) facilities, and bug fixes prompted by Gerald Hanusch,
and in large part implemented by Matti Aarnio.
