.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 4-Oct-1993
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 8 UNIX 3.0
.TH MAILIFY 8
.SH NAME
mailify, sysin
\- bitnet incoming file processing programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
/usr/lib/huji/mailify
.RB [ " \-n " ]
.I filepath
.LP
/usr/lib/huji/sysin
.RB [ " \-n " ]
.I filepath
.LP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "mailify"
.IX "sysin"
.LP
.I Mailify
is a special purpose program to receive BSMTP
.\"  and plain mail files (hdr+body,
.\"  which is within BSMTP envelope anyway).
Transport system launches this program
.\"  (usually implemented as a script)
to handle incoming mail.
Reception of PROFS NOTES
and DEFRT1 plain mail-files (non BSMTP)
is left for further study.
.LP
.I Sysin
is a special purpose program for receiving RJE jobs from the network.
Actual operation is subject for further study.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -n 1.0i 0
Original `spool' file should \fBnot\fR be removed after successfull
file processing is done.
.SH FILES
.nf
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.RI "File processing exit config file, which is defined in " funetnje.cf.
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR transfer (1),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR receive (1),
.BR rdrlist (1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
When any of these programs is fed a file containing errorneous
data (not
.BR funetnje (8)
spool file,) these mostly recover with a burp, sometimes these
might even drop a core on pathological input case.
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
