.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993, 22-Oct-1993
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 8 UNIX 3.0
.TH NJEROUTES 8
.SH NAME
njeroutes \- FUNETNJE bitnet software routing database generator.
.SH SYNOPSIS
njeroutes
.I header.filename
.I routes.filename
.I database.filename
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "njeroutes"
.LP
.I Net_routes
builds routing database of BITNET nodes for
.I funetnje
program internal usage.
If no
\f4DEFAULT-ROUTE
has been defined in
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
(see
.BR funetnje (8))
then this is ONLY way to route messages and files from local node
to anywhere.
.LP
Example of
.I header.file
for node \f4FINFILES\fR having alias name \f4HAMSTER\fR.
.LP
.nf
\f4*
\f4*  Header of HUyNJE/FUNETNJE package routing table
\f4*
\f4*  Generic format:
\f4*	SITE	LINE	(FORMAT/INFO)
\f4*
\f4 ROUTE FINFILES LOCAL ASCII
\f4 ROUTE HAMSTER  LOCAL ASCII
.fi
.LP
It may also be usefull to define alternate routes just in
case the direct link doesn't work:
.LP
.nf
\f4 ROUTE FIGBOX FIGBOX
\f4 ROUTE FINHUTC FIGBOX
.fi
.LP
First one defines that \f4FIGBOX\f4 has no alternatives, while
\f4FINHUTC\fR can get routed via \f4FIGBOX\fR in case direct
link to it is not active.
.LP
Example routing data for same node.  Used format is same as
IBM RSCS v1 uses, thus it is easily obtainable using common BITNET
tools.
Next step connection of the example node is \f4FIGBOX\fR.
.LP
.nf
\f4* * The position of the network name and country *
\f4* * assumes that the RSCS ROUTE command does not *
\f4* * have more than two parameters.               *
\f4ROUTE VERS9012 FIGBOX   EARN     NL
\f4ROUTE LINKS012 FIGBOX   BITNET   US
\f4ROUTE FINABO   FIGBOX   EARN     FI
\f4ROUTE FINALKO  FIGBOX   EARN     FI
\f4ROUTE FINFUN   FIGBOX   EARN     FI
\f4ROUTE FINGATE  FIGBOX   EARN     FI
\f4ROUTE FINHUT   FIGBOX   EARN     FI
.fi
.LP
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR ucp (8).
.SH BUGS
.LP
None, we hope.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All error conditions are reported with self explanatory text messages.
.LP
If multiple entries of same node are attempted (for example one in
header, other in routes), first one stays as routing definition, rest
are reported as duplicates.
.SH WARNING
It is not adviced to create output on same
.BR file ,
as the current database is, although they will not be intermixed, as
if there is a file with the target name, it will be unlinked before
the processing starts.
.LP
Once the database is generated, and placed (with
.BR mv (1),
for example) on place of the active database, a
.RB ` ucp "(8) " "rescan route" '
-command is suggested (or full restart of the emulator.)
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
