.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 8 UNIX 3.0
.TH QRDR 8
.SH NAME
qrdr \- incoming bitnet queue peeking tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IP qrdr 0.5i 0
.RB [ " \-u \fIuser\fR " ]
.RB [ " \-n " ]
.RB [ " \-l " ]
.RI [ " dirpaths\fR,\fI filepaths " ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "qrdr"
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "mailify"
.IX "receive"
.LP
.I Qrdr
gives users a tool to see what they have in their incoming BITNET spool
queues.
Depending on protection it also lets others to see what user XYZ has in
his/her queue, or ANY directory possibly containing BITNET spool files,
or just any specified files...
.LP
When
.RB ` "\-u \fIuser" '
has not been used, default behaviour of
.I qrdr
is to find out who user is making query  by asking `whoami',
eg getting value of
.B LOGNAME
environment variable.
(In SysV this is
.B USER
variable.)
If environment doesn't give answer,
.I /etc/passwd
file is consulted with
effective uid.
.LP
Spool directory is determined using same mechanism as in
.I funetnje
main program.  Sample configuration of file procesing exits gives directory
.RI ` /usr/spool/bitspool '
in which UPPERCASE userids (or pseudoids - MAILER is one such) are `user'
specific subdirectories containing individual spooled files.
.LP
Option
.BR ` \-l '
gives file paths to spool files, and some heuristics of file contents
for
.IR rdrlist (1)
program.
For program-parsing the
.BR ` \-l '
option uses singular
tabulator to separate output fields.
.LP
Example of
.I qrdr
output for user 
.RB ` mea ':
.LP
.nf
.fz 4 -2
\f4QRDR: Spool dir: `/usr/spool/bitspool/MEA/'
\f4From:             To:               FName:   FExt:    Type  Form:    SpoolID
\f4NETSERV@FINHUT    MEA@FINFILES      NETSERV  NOTE     PUN A QUFINHUT 0002
\f4NETSERV@FINHUT    MEA@FINFILES      NETSERV  NOTE     PUN A QUFINHUT 0004
\f4MEA@FINFILES      MEA@FINFILES      STANDARD INPUT    PUN C STANDARD 0006
\f4NETSERV@FINHUT    MEA@FINFILES      NETSERV  NOTE     PUN A QUFINHUT 0003
\f4ZEHAVI@ISRAEARN   MEA@FIRIEN        ZEHAVI   NOTE     PUN A STANDARD 0005
\f4...
\f4LISTSERV@SEARN    MEA@FINFILES      INFO     FILELIST PUN N QULISTSV 0023
\f4LISTSERV@FINHUTC  MEA@FINFILES      LISTOWNR REFCARD  PUN N QULISTSV 0024
\f4CMS1@ALIJKU11     MEA@FINFILES      CMS1     NOTE     PUN A STD      0025
\f4Found 23 files.
.fi
.LP
For the
.B \-l
option, recognized data types are:
NETDATA, VMSDUMP, CARD (Cornell CARD), and PUNCH when none of
the previous ones match to input punch records.
For three PRINT formats there are:
PRINT (Machine Carriage Control), PASA (ANSI Carriage Control), and
PCPDS for rare 3rd alternative.
.SH FILES
.nf
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.I /etc/funetnje.pid
.RI "File processing exit config file, which is defined in " funetnje.cf
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP LOGNAME 1.0i 0
Primary way to find who I am. (BSD)
.IP USER 1.0i 0
Secondary way to find who I am. (SysV)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR rdrlist (1),
.BR receive (1),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
