.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993, 5-Nov-1993
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 1.1
.TH RECEIVE 1
.B "** RAW DRAFT ** RAW DRAFT ** RAW DRAFT ** RAW DRAFT **"
.SH NAME
receive, transfer
\- bitnet incoming file processing programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
receive
.RB [ "\-n" ]
.RB [ "\-a|\-b" ]
.RB [ "\-asa|\-rawpun|\-bitraw|\-bcat" ]
.RB [ "\-d" ]
.BR [ "\-u "
.I username
.B ]
.RB [ "\-o "
.I outpath
.B ]
.I {filepath|spoolid}
.LP
/usr/lib/huji/transfer
\f4DestUser@DestNode
.I /absolute/file/path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitcat"
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "sendfile"
.IX "netdata"
.IX "ndparse"
.LP
.I Receive
is a relatively simple minded tool for receiving files.
Default usage is to translate incoming
.SM EBCDIC
PUNCH or PRINT records to
.SM ASCII,
and output them with appended newlines.
Trailing spaces may get removed at first, as they are (usually anyway)
unnecessary.
At the 
.SM NETDATA
receiving, no such stripping is done.
.LP
.I Receive
can enter
.I \-d (debug)
mode, and display the contents of the spool file.
At that mode it will display symbolically NJE header contents,
and also analyze
.SM NETDATA
records.
No output file is created in this mode.
.LP
.I Receive
can control output conversion with several keys:
.IP "\fB\-b\fR" 1.0i 0
Turns on enforced binary mode, which outputs the incoming
file as is;
.SM NETDATA
content is analyzed and output as is, and other
.SM PUNCH
modes get also handled in raw manner.
This is \fBdefault\fR mode for a class N
.SM NETDATA
file, and must be explicitely turned off with \fB\-a\fR.
.IP "\fB\-a\fR" 1.0i 0
Turns on enforced
.SM EBCDIC\-ASCII
conversion, even when a
.SM NETDATA
file has class N.
.IP "\fB\-rawpun\fR" 1.0i 0
Outputs nominal size record contents; usually 80 characters per
record
.SM (PUNCH)
without adding anything to the records, nor translating them.
.IP "\fB\-bcat\fR" 1.0i 0
outputs non-translated records in format:

\f4 <char of reclen>  <chars of record>
.IP "\fB\-asa\fR" 1.0i 0
Affects
.SM PRINT
files which contain MCC carriage control codes
.RB "(see " bitspool "(5))"
by translating them to
.SM FORTRAN-style
carriage control.
.LP
.I Receive
outputs to a file whose location is current working directory, and in
non-NETDATA -case the name is formed from spool entry by lowercasing
.IR FileName.FileExt ,
unless
.RB ` \-o ',
is used to override it.
With
.RB ` \-o '
one can specify
.RB ` \- '
to denote
.BR STDOUT .
In case the spool-file contains
.SM NETDATA,
default filename is taken from inside the
.SM "NETDATA INMR02"
control records;
The
.SM INMDSNAM
contains (usually) three entries: \"Disk FileName FileType\",
and they get mapped into UNIX file as:
\"filename.filetype\".
In case the original file is from MVS TSO, and has
.SM INMMEMBR
key defined, resulting UNIX filename is:
\"filename.filetype.membr\".
.LP
Debug output goes to \fISTDERR\fR as usual.
.LP
.I Transfer
modifies file headers changing its destination address so it is possible to
send that file again to NJE network for new destination.
However other security related aspects may not allow all tricks.
(For now origination address in headers will not be changed to point local
user, and thus it is possible to create a file which seems to be traversing
the network in wrong direction.)
.I Transfer
does also requeueing for file transmission.
.LP
.SH OUTPUT FILE NAME MAPPING
User can explicitely define a name for the output file, or let the
.I receive
to invent on its own.
.LP
Default output name is formed from

.LP
When input processing  reaches records to be output, the output file is opened.


.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fInone\fR 1.0i 0
Punch files are output as is, and Print files get
converted from whatever carriage-control format
they use to ASCII-CR/LF/FF format.
.IP "\fB\-asa\fR" 1.0i 0
Print files are output with
.SM FORTRAN-style
carriage controls.  One line per input record.
.IP "\fB\-b\fR" 1.0i 0
Binary output.  See DESCRIPTION on each command.
.IP "\fB\-bitraw\fR" 1.0i 0
Special input format switch for
.IR ndparse .
Globs output from
.I bitcat -b
.IP "\fB\-d\fR" 1.0i 0
Debug output.  To \fISTDERR\fR.
.IP "\fB\-n\fR" 1.0i 0
Original `spool' file should \fBnot\fR be removed after successfull
file processing is done.  (Successfull == No errors, Netdata file
translated to ASCII using
.I bitcat
might not be usefull.)
.IP "\fB\-rawpun\fR" 1.0i 0
Special input format switch for
.IR ndparse .
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
With environment variable
.B EBCDICTBL
user can select alternate EBCDIC <-> ASCII translation
tables.  For more info, see
.BR ebcdictbl (5).
.LP
.SH FILES
.nf
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.I /etc/funetnje.pid
.RI "File processing exit config file, which is defined in " funetnje.cf.
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR sysin (8),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR rdrlist (1)
.SH BUGS
.LP
.I Ndparse
should be able to dig original dates and names from ND file.
.LP
Sometimes
.I ndparse
fails to understand received netdata file.  Subject for further
study.
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
When any of these programs is fed a file containing errorneous
data (not
.BR funetnje "(8) spool file,)"
these mostly recover with a burp, sometimes these
might even drop a core on pathological input case.
.SH WARNING
With
.I ndparse
it is one time mistake to forget to use
.B \-n
when peeking a file.  That file goes to bit bucket at that
moment if no errors are detected. (rc=0 -> no file...)
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
