.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 20-Oct-1993
.\"
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 1.1
.TH SENDFILE 1
.SH NAME
sendfile, submit, punch, print \- bitnet file send tools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IP sendfile 0.8i 0
.I ToUser@ToNode
.RB [ " \-fix | \-raw " ]
.RB [ " \-bin " ]
.RB [ " \-lrecl nn " ]
.RB [ " \-fn \fIfname ftype " ]
.RB [ " \-class N " ]
.RB [ " \-form \fIFromName " ]
.RB [ " \-dist \fIDistribution " ]
.RB [ " \-tag \fIRSCS-TAG " ]
.RI [ filepath ]
.IP punch 0.8i 0
.I ToUser@ToNode
.RB [ " \-rawpun " ]
.RB [ " \-fix | \-raw " ]
.RB [ " \-fn \fIfname ftype " ]
.RB [ " \-class N " ]
.RB [ " \-form \fIFromName " ]
.RB [ " \-dist \fIDistribution " ]
.RB [ " \-tag \fIRSCS-TAG " ]
.RI [ filepath ]
.IP print 0.8i 0
.I ToUser@ToNode
.RB [ " -asa " ]
.RB [ " \-fix | \-raw " ]
.RB [ " \-bin " ]
.RB [ " \-fn \fIfname ftype " ]
.RB [ " \-class N " ]
.RB [ " \-form \fIFromName " ]
.RB [ " \-dist \fIDistribution " ]
.RB [ " \-tag \fIRSCS-TAG " ]
.RI [ filepath ]
.IP submit 0.8i 0
.I ToUser@ToNode
.RB [ " \-fix | \-raw " ]
.RB [ " \-form \fIFromName " ]
.RI [ filepath ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "sendfile"
.IX "submit"
.IX "netdata"
.LP
.I Sendfile
command sends out
.SM NETDATA
encoded file
with given
.I "fname + ftype"
and
.I "FormName,"
if they are specified.
.LP
.I Punch
command sends out 80-chars per record punch-card images
with given
.I "fname + ftype"
and
.I "FormName,"
if they are specified.
.LP
.I Submit
command sends out a punch with special flags directing it to be
a NJE SYSIN job.
.LP
When a file is defined,
.I reallylongfilename.really-long-extension.more.dots
maps to:
.I "reallylongfile + really-long-"
(12 + 12 chars.)
Default filename (when nothing is defined) is:
.IR "STANDARD INPUT" .
.LP
Default for
.I form
is
.IR STANDARD .
.LP
When no input file is defined,
.I STDIN
is assumed
.LP
Options for
.BR punch ,
.BR print ,
.BR sendfile ,
and 
.B submit
are:
.IP "\fB\-asa\fR" 1.8i 0
For
.IR print ", and " sendfile .
A print format which expects to get
.SM FORTRAN
carriage control style input.
.IP "\fB\-bin\fR" 1.8i 0
For
.BR sendfile (1)
only.
Defines binary transmission, and defaults class `N', if nothing
else is defined.
.IP "\fB\-class C\fR" 1.8i 0
Defines single uppercase alpha letter for the NJE spool
class of the file.   For
.B sendfile
the
\-bin
option defaults class to be `N', otherwise default is `A'.
.IP "\fB\-fix\fR" 1.8i 0
Makes padded records of native width; 80 for punch, and submit,
132+1 for print.
On sendfile it asks output to be of fixed size.  On such cases
input lines get padded by the receiver to the fixed format.
.IP "\fB\-fn fname ftype\fR" 1.8i 0
For
.BR sendfile "(1), " punch "(1), " print "(1) only."
Defines NJE level \fI`file name'\fR and \fI`file type'\fR strings.
Default values are: `STANDARD', and `INPUT'.
.IP "\fB\-form FormName\fR" 1.8i 0
Defines NJE level \fI`file form name'\fR to be used.
Default value is `STANDARD'.
.IP "\fB-lrecl ##\fR" 1.8i 0
For
.BR sendfile (1)
defines logical record length.
Defaults are: binary: 1022, others: 132.
If your ASCII input is wider (or narrower), do consider using this
option to optimize receiver performance.
.IP "\fB\-rawpun\fR" 1.8i 0
For
.BR punch (1)
only.
Outputs fixed 80 chars per record lines, and expects same from input.
(No cr/lfs wanted, just 80 bytes for each record.)
.IP "\fB\-dist Distribution\fR" 1.8i 0
Defines the RSCS Distribution code (max. 8 characters) which may be
used to identify printed outputs. Defaults to user name of the sender
translated to upper case. If not set here, the emulator inserts the
default SYSTEM.
.IP "\fB\-tag RSCS-TAG\fR" 1.8i 0
Defines NJE RSCS TAG (136 characters) which is used to carry various
informations especially at RJE applications.
.LP
Default behaviour is to read in lines, and convert them from
.SM ASCII
to
.SM EBCDIC
and pad or truncate to 80 char (132 for print) records
which get spooled for transmission.
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
With environment variable
.B EBCDICTBL
user can select alternate EBCDIC <\-> ASCII translation
tables.  For more info, see
.BR ebcdictbl (5).
.LP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR receive (1),
.BR send (1),
.BR transfer (1)
.SH BUGS
.LP
Sendfile should figure out the lrecl in text files by smart pre-scanning
of the file -- doable if sending real files ?
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
These programs show their usage summary, when there is something
wrong with input parameters.  Subtle usage bugs might not be detected!
.SH NOTES
This program quartet is actually same program with 4 different
invocation names, and therefore 4 (slightly) different functions.
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Gerald Hanusch, Johannes Kepler Universitaet/Universitaet Linz, Austria
<k000165@alijku11.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, file handling exits,
man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
Batch (SYSIN) facilities, and bug fixes prompted by Gerald Hanush,
and in large part implemented by Matti Aarnio.
