.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993, 10-Oct-1993
.\"
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 1 UNIX 3.0
.TH SEND 1
.SH NAME
send, ygone \- bitnet message send tools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IP send 0.5i 0
.RB [ "\-s|\-u username" ]
.BI "\-c{ommand}" " host "
[ text of command ]
.IP send 0.5i 0
.RB [ "\-s|\-u username" ]
.RB [ "\-c\fR{\fBommand" }]
.I " @host "
[ text of command ]
.IP send 0.5i 0
.RB [ "\-s|\-u username" ]
.RB [ "\-m\fR{\fBessage" }]
.I " user@host "
[ text of message ]
.IP ygone 0.8i 0
.BR [ " \-d " ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "send"
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.IX "sendfile"
.IX "submit"
.IX "netdata"
.IX "ygone"
.LP
.I send
sends NMR messages over RSCS network to target
.I host/user.
Only necessary argument is the first one telling if this is
.I command
to be sent to a hostname without giving
.RB ` @ '
in its name.
Commands go to (usual name) `RSCS' subsystem at each host,
Messages to specificied users.
.LP
Examples:
.LP
.nf
.fp 4 CW
\f4send @bitnic cpq time
\f4send -c bitnic cpq time
\f4    \fR(Sends a "CPQ TIME" to BITNIC)
\f4send user@bitnic hello
\f4    \fR(Sends a "hello" to user@bitnic)
\f4send -u foo user@bitnic hello
\f4    \fR(Sends a "hello" to user@bitnic from user foo@<localhost>)
\f4send -s user@bitnic hello
\f4    \fR(Sends a "hello" to user@bitnic from local system: "@<localhost>")
.fi
.LP
When
.I send
is left without
.RI [ "text of message" ]
portion of arguments, it prompts that from user giving target address
as prompt string.  Hit empty line or EOF to quit.
.LP
If no 
.RI [ "text of message" ]
is given,
.I STDIN
is used as an input for 
.IR send ,
thus IO redirection can be used.
.LP
When
.I send
is left without target address, that too is asked from the user.
.LP
.I Ygone
controls temporary disposition of incoming NMR-messages into
a personal logfile.  In UNIX systems that file is
.I .ygone.messages
in user's home directory.
This association is broken when
.BR funetnje (8)
is restarted, as the list of service requesters is kept only in core..
.LP
With option
.B -d
user can disable
.IR ygone ,
and look at latest set of arrived messages (if any).
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
With environment variable
.B EBCDICTBL
user can select alternate EBCDIC <\-> ASCII translation
tables.  For more info, see
.BR ebcdictbl (5).
.LP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/funetnje.cf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitspool (5),
.BR bmail (8),
.BR ebcdictbl (5),
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR mailify (8),
.BR qrdr (8),
.BR receive (1),
.BR sendfile (1)
.SH BUGS
Doesn't always 
.LP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
These programs show their usage summary, when there is something
wrong with input parameters.  Subtle usage bugs might not be detected!
.SH NOTES
.I Ygone
is subject to further developement.
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Gerald Hanusch, Johannes Kepler Universitaet/Universitaet Linz, Austria
<k000165@alijku11.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, file handling exits,
man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
Port of ygone to FUNET's version by Gerald Hanusch.
