.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  Man page for HUJI-NJE/FUNET-NJE on UNIX system.
.\"
.\"  Written by  Matti Aarnio <mea@finfiles.bitnet> <mea@nic.funet.fi>
.\"
.\"  Date: 27-Dec-1990, 18-Sep-1993, 11-Feb-1994
.\"
.fp 4 CW
.ds ]W Funet-Nje 8 UNIX 3.0
.TH "FUNET-NJE on UNIX" 8 "11-Feb 1994"
.SH NAME
ucp \- FUNETNJE bitnet communication program control function interface.
.SH SYNOPSIS
ucp
.RB [ " command to be issued " ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "ucp"
.IX "bitnet"
.IX "funetnje"
.LP
.I Ucp
command lets system manager to control
.BR funetnje (8)
functionality and modify some of parameters given on
configuration file (which usually is
.IR /etc/funetnje.cf .)
.LP
.I Ucp
can be started without any command line arguments, and then
it asks commands with
\f4NJE-CP>
prompt.
.LP
\f4ucp help\fR gives list of commands that
.I ucp
understands.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR funetnje (8),
.BR mailify (1),
.BR send (1),
.BR sendfile (1),
.BR receive (1),
.BR bmail (8),
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Obscure.  Most return results come with `mesg' facility, and user
.B must
have
.RB ` mesg (1) " y" '
to be able to receive those messages.
.SH NOTE
To be able to use this facility, you must have write permission to
the
.SM FUNET-NJE
inter-module communications `mailbox', which is implemented as
owner/group writable FIFO.
This program
.B should not
be turned into a SUID/SGID program, rather those who must be able
to command the funetnje shall be either super-user capable, or have
the access-group of the communications pipe.
See
.BR funetnje (8)
for more.
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Yehavi Bourvine, Hebrew University of Yerusalem, Israel
.I <yehavi@hujivms.bitnet>.
.LP
Matti Aarnio, Finnish University and Research Network \- FUNET, Finland
.I <mea@nic.funet.fi> <mea@finfiles.bitnet>.
.LP
Original (VMS oriented package) software by Yehavi Bourvine,
UNIX features, plenty of modifications, man-pages by Matti Aarnio.
